# General Format of C++ Code

Source files can be overwhelming to start working in. This section is 
dedicated to clarifying and giving context to the various keywords used. This
is not a comprehensive list of all the keywords in C++, just an introduction to
get new programmers in C++ off the ground.

---

Let's take a look at some basic code - this is generated by my IDE (Integrated
Development Environment) whenever I create a new project in Clion.

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    
    std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

Running this code as is, gives us the result:

```
Hello World
```

#### Here's a general idea of what the program does

This is a hello world program. As you can see, it prints "Hello World" to
the console. This is a pretty typical first project among new programmers.
If you are already familiar with code, this is probably nothing new. Lets
break down the code itself line by line, starting with the `#include`

---

## What does each line mean?

```c++
#include <iostream>
```

First off, what in the heck is `iostream`? Basically, it is just a really large 
file filled with code for inputting and outputting stuff. If you remove this 
line, you'll probably get an error on the line containing `std::cout`.

`#include` is a **preprocessor directive**. When the compiler begins
compiling, any preprocessor directive (lines with `#`) are looked at and run 
first (before actual code). `#include` is a essentially a big copy and paste 
instruction. When we `#include iostream`, what we are doing is copying the 
contents of the iostream file and pasting it where the #include directive is 
in our current file.

We will talk more about files - and learn to use `#include` with our own
files <!-- in  [Header Files](./HeaderFiles.md) -->.


### What is Main?


```c++

int main () {
    //code goes here
    return 0;
}
```

This is what is known as your main function. It is your computer's entrypoint
into your program. Most variables and instructions will be written in this 
function.`return 0;` is our program's way of telling us that the program ran
successfully.

We'll go in much more detail about functions - their structure, how to make our
own, what the `return` keyword does - in the future. For now, make sure your 
main function looks identical to what is shown above.

## Hello World

```c++
std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
```

This line of code is what prints out "Hello World" to the console. We will cover
cout in more detail later <!-- in [Input-Output](./InputOutput.md) -->. I would
recommend playing around with cout and trying to apply what you know about 
[variables](./Variables.md).


## Formatting
The compiler does not read whitespace (spacing and tabbing, etc.) in the
source (cpp) file. This means you could technically write code like:

```c++
#include <iostream> int main(){ std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl; return 0;}
```

I would **strongly** discourage coding in one line like so. This is incredibly hard
to read and as your files get longer (it is typical to have hundreds of lines of code)
you will have a hard time navigating your code.

You also do not want code like this:

```c++
#include <iostream>
int main() {
std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
return 0;
}
```

It has become a standard among programmers to indent code within curly braces
(`{` `}`) and while this code is much better than the previous block, it will
be difficult to read, especially as the source file grows in size.

*Get in the habit of formatting cleanly early on in your coding journey*

### Miscellaneous pieces of information:
Most lines of code in C++ end with a `;`. 

C++ is case sensitive:

```c++
int MAIN()
```

will not be recognized or treated the same as 

```c++
int main()
```


C++ organizes variables, objects, and functions (covered later) into namespaces.
for example in `std::cout`, the `cout` object belongs to the `std` (standard)
namespace. A line like:

```c++
using namespace std;
```

will tell the compiler to assume that we are talking about the standard namespace
and assume that `cout` refers to `std::cout`.


----

# [Go back to the home page](HomePage.md)
